---
layout: default
full_title: Sculpin &mdash; PHP Static Site Generator
fancy_index: true

---

## PHP Static Site Generator

Sculpin takes plain old text files (Markdown, Textile, etc.) and combines them with Twig
templates to produce a set of static HTML files that can be easily deployed to almost any
hosting platform.


## Why Use a Static Site Generator?

**Security, performance, and simplicity.** A static site, by definition, is a site rendered
to static HTML. This means no code has to be executed on the server. This means no database
has to be running on the server. These things mean less load on a server *even during traffic
spikes*.

It is tempting to consider static site generators a "step back" or placed in the same category
as the likes of Dreamweaver or FrontPage. This is not really a fair comparison. Modern static
sit generators *do* output static HTML but they are programmable and developer friendly.


## Why Sculpin?

Sculpin is a **PHP static site generator**. If you like and are familiar with PHP, Sculpin
should be a natural fit.

Sculpin is managed by **Composer**. This may not seem like a big deal, but this means that
installing Sculpin, its dependencies, and managing the dependencies of your project are all
quite easy tasks. [Learn more about Composer](http://getcomposer.org).

Sculpin uses the **Twig template engine**. If you like Twig and want to use it as you would
expect Twig to work (including template inheritance) Sculpin is the right choice!
[Learn more about Twig](http://twig.sensiolabs.org/).

Sculpin is built around **Symfony's HTTP Kernel**. Among other things, this means that
Sculpin can leverage Symfony's Dependency Injection Container and its Bundle system.
[Learn more about Symfony Bundles](http://symfony.com/doc/2.0/cookbook/bundles/index.html).


## Community

If you have questions please make sure to check in with the Sculpin
[community]({{site.url}}/community)! Whether it be IRC, [Twitter](http://twitter.com/getsculpin),
or mailing list, we are here for you!


## Project Status

Sculpin continues to be **unstable**, under heavy development, and lacking in-depth documentation.
Be prepared for possible changes in core functionality requiring you to fix your existing
site.

If you are interested in trying out Sculpin please check out the
[documentation]({{site.url}}/documentation).


#### So Does It Actually Work?

Yes! There are several sites currently generated by Sculpin. In fact, the site you are reading
right now is generated by Sculpin.
[View its source on GitHub!](https://github.com/sculpin/sculpin.io)
